---
title: Book Launch - Brahmin Genocide 
author: Namrata Anantharam
category: Dharma Today
tags: 
- brahmin 
- genocide
date: "2023-08-17"
image: https://rnfvzaelmwbbvfbsppir.supabase.co/storage/v1/object/public/brhatwebsite/05dhiti/brahmingenocidebooklaunch.webp
excerpt: "The book Brahmin Genocide - The Precursor to Hindu Extinction was officially launched in Bengaluru at Sri Ramanuja Sanskriti Bhavan, Yadugiri Yathiraja Matha Malleswaram. It was an evening replete with pertinent reflections, calls to introspection and awakening by the Brahmin community."
---

The launch of the book **<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Brahmin Genocide</span>** was held on the 15th of August at Sri Ramanuja Sanskriti Bhavan, Yadugiri Yathiraja Matha in Bengaluru. The event was graced by His Holiness Sri Sri Yadugiri Yathiraja Narayana Ramanuja Jeeyar Swami of Shri Yadugiri Yathiraja Matha, Melkote and His Holiness Dr. Sri Sri Sugunendra Theertha Swamiji of Shri Puthige Matha, Udupi. _Anugraha sandeśa_ from His Holiness Sri Sri Swayamprakasha Sachidananda Saraswati Swamiji of Shri Hariharapura Matha, Hariharapura was also received. Vedavaridhi Dr. P. Ramanujan (Aasthana Vidwan from Ahobila Matha and Founder of the Parankushachar Institute of Vedic Studies) and Vidyavachaspathi Dr. Aralumallige Parthasarathy (an international scholar,  Dāsa-Sāhitya expert and founder of the Global Vishnu Sahasranama Satsanga Federation) were the guests of honor.

It was an evening replete with pertinent reflections, calls to introspection and awakening by the Brahmin community. The chief guests and revered Maṭhādhipatis emphasized inculcating a sense of identity and self-awareness among Brahmin individuals and families. 

Dr. Ramanujam delivered an insightful address on the concept of Brahmin identity and academic excellence. He discussed how individuals, whether well-versed in shastras or not, should be aware of the dangers they might face and it is their responsibility to remove the _bhaya_ and _bhaya_ _kāraṇa_ from their paths. He stressed on the need to conduct oneself in a manner consistent with one’s identity and intrinsic nature. The intrinsic qualities shared with powerful entities like lions, tigers, snakes, fire and the Sun were compared to that of a Brahmin. By virtue of their respective intrinsic properties, they needed no introduction in any context and continue to shine forth with their brilliance. He highlighted the role of _tapas_ and _niyama_ to be instrumental in shaping the Brahmin's path and urged the community to remain true to their essence without fearing or targeting others. He exhorted Brahmins to revert to their tapas because this alone had the power to bring them back to their innate essence. He appealed to the community to refrain from being mild or timid and standing up for their identity. “_Sanghe śaktihi_” - he emphasized on the power of the collective to awaken and remove these obstacles.

Dr. Parthasarathy, a seasoned professional with extensive experience in multinational corporations, focused on the challenges faced by the Brahmin community in contemporary society. He touched upon the influence of false narratives, divisive theories, and left-leaning ideologies on Brahmin perception. Dr. Parthasarathy outlined the need for unity among Brahmins to counter such challenges and emphasized that protecting the Brahmin identity was crucial not just for the community but also for the preservation of Sanātana Dharma. He highlighted the importance of academic excellence and the need for Brahmins to regain their status as scholars and thinkers. Shedding light on the critical need of the book, he shared how the author had comprehensively busted several false narratives using compelling statistics and examples. He criticized the historical deprivation of educational opportunities for Brahmins. He questioned the prevalent stereotypes and hatred directed at the community, asserting that Brahmins contribute positively to society. He appealed for unity among Brahmins to counter discrimination and unite against adversities threatening Sanātana Dharma. 

His Holiness Sri Sri Yadugiri Yathiraja Narayana Ramanuja Jeeyar Swami emphasized the critical issue of Matāntara (the difference in opinion leading to division within Sanātana Dharma) leading to divisions within Sanātana Dharma. He highlighted the need to address these differences to ensure the unity and integrity of the spiritual tradition. His Holiness stressed that the establishment of Sanātana Dharma is synonymous with the establishment of the nation. This assertion underscores the deep connection between spiritual values and the well-being of the nation as a whole. His Holiness discussed the efforts made to find lasting solutions during which three significant decisions were made in the past month to address the challenges effectively. The speaker mentioned two books that offer solutions to the challenges faced. <span style="text-decoration:underline;">Brahmin Genocide</span> by Mahalingam Balaji and <span style="text-decoration:underline;">Kadambari</span> by Nawaz Khan were highlighted as works that shed light on ways to address contemporary issues. The importance of revitalizing Vedic studies and practices like _sandhyā vandana_ was emphasized as a means to counteract negative influences on Sanātana Dharma. His Holiness also highlighted that Brahminism is a way of life rich with teachings, rituals, and knowledge. It was underscored that it's not just a caste or religion but a valuable heritage that needs to be preserved. The presence of prominent leaders from different _maṭhas_, including Narayana Jeevar Swamiji and Sugunenda Tirtha Swamiji, was acknowledged as a sign of collective commitment towards preserving Sanātana Dharma.

Dr. Sri Sri Sugunendra Theertha Swamiji introduced a Hindi saying that highlighted the dynamics of power. The adage emphasized that if the world is guided by the wisdom of Brahmins, their influence would be paramount. His Holiness stressed the significance of Brahmins and Ṛṣis in making informed and honest decisions. Their guidance to kings is vital for effective governance. Swamiji expressed his appreciation for the Brahmin community and their pivotal role in serving society and the nation. He called upon them to continue this service as a means of contributing to societal upliftment.

Śrī Seshadri shared an inspiring message from Jagadguru Swayamprakasha Mahaswamiji of Hariharapura, Kumbakonam. He condemned the allegations faced by the Brahmin community and expressed happiness about Śrī Balaji's book. “No community should face these atrocities”, he remarked and emphasized that unity and education were vital tools in meeting these challenges. The timely nature of the book and the critical need for it to be brought to the collective was also shared by him.

The event served as a platform for thought-provoking discussions on Brahmin identity, academic excellence, and unity within the community. The perspectives shared by the esteemed speakers shed light on the challenges faced by Brahmins in the current social and educational landscape and proposed solutions to uplift the community. The release of Śrī M Balaji’s book is a significant step towards creating awareness and lists down a ten-step action plan to address this existential threat being faced by the community. 
