---
title: kāśi and prayāga
tag: 3
image: https://rnfvzaelmwbbvfbsppir.supabase.co/storage/v1/object/public/brhatwebsite/13scrolls/palimpsest/palim17.webp
snip: "This land is pristine and fertile.  Blessed even, for Rshi Vasishtha has consecrated it with the greatest prayers.  There is a gentle air here, comforting and secure.  I will build a grand, luminous city here and name it after your son.  This will be my gift to your line, and may it prosper as much as Suhotra’s."
---

> This land is pristine and fertile.  Blessed even, for Rshi Vasishtha has consecrated it with the greatest prayers.  There is a gentle air here, comforting and secure.  I will build a grand, luminous city here and name it after your son.  This will be my gift to your line, and may it prosper as much as Suhotra’s.<br><cite>Maharaja Bharata to his son Sunahotra</cite>

‘Maharaja’ Bharata- that was his title.  He had forged a Kingdom larger than even the Suryavansha in their prime, covering more of Aryavarta than anyone before.  He deserved a title bigger than King, a mere Raja.  

	Even at the age of eighty, he looked every bit a monarch.  His barrel-chest stuck out proudly, the newly-minted armour hiding infinite scars.  The crown upon his head hid the smallest of a bald patch, recently emerged.  He had favoured a beard in the past decades, allowing it to grow dense and long.  This was how a real Maharaja looked, the criers were singing.  All across Prayaga artisans were furiously at work, creating busts of Maharaja Bharata that would capture the man just before he stepped down and gave the Kingdom to his sons.

	Prayaga, Holy Capital of the Grand Bharata Kingdom.  Built on the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna, the city was opposite to where Pratisthana once stood.  Across the river, a memorial had come up around the half-destroyed Citadel of Soma where Suhotra and Yamini had engaged in legendary battle.  Their busts stood there now, proud and intimidating.  Every morning as they bathed in the waters of the Confluence, the citizens of Prayaga could gaze across to Pratisthana and remember the carnage that erupted there three decades ago.  But Maharaja Bharata had given Prayaga thirty-two years of peace and prosperity.  The capital was home to more than twelve thousand people, of which no less than five thousand were rshis or their pupils.  Great schools flourished in Prayaga dedicated to all the Maharshis- Vasishtha, Kashyapa, Atri, Angirasa, Kanva and Medhatithi.  Grand learning centers prospered- students could enroll themselves in astronomy, astrology, Vedanga, mathematics, biology, herbology and more.  

	So different was Prayaga’s design, so unique to the Bharata that it would indeed be alien to a citizen from the older Suryavansha, Dasa and Druhyu cities that once lay along the Sindhu and Sarasvati.  There were no grid-pattern roads, no canals or great-baths.  There were no permanent Vedis, no altars that were firmly constructed into the ground.  No four walls separated the main city from the unplanned growth around it, and the only grand structure in all of Prayaga was the large, towering canal that lined part of the Ganga to divert some of its waters safely away through another channel.  Markets and trade flourished like never before.  Metals, alloys, ivory, timbers, animal skins, pots, beads, rice, cotton, and several new grains such as wheat and maize flowed both upstream and down.  A large port serviced Prayaga’s trade, and boats plied between the city and Kashi at regular intervals throughout the day. 

New gods were emerging, schools were proclaiming glories of figures such as Rudra, Vishnu and Brahma- parallel to the healthy ritualism of the old Devas.  Foreigners were to be found everywhere.  There were grim-faced and alien-tongue speaking traders from across the seas, both east and west.  In the learning centers, previously unknown philosophies were finding space to air their beliefs.  Music and singing had their halls too, patronage generously supplied by Maharaja Bharata. And now, decked up as it was for the grand ceremony of the Maharaja stepping down, this was Aryavarta’s most glorious city yet.

	The ritual altars were alit, and the royal family stood on a podium in the center.  Crowds thronged all around the ceremonial structure.  They could hear nothing over the prayers of dozens of rshis, singing their own songs and celebrating the magnificence of their ruling family.  At the podium stood Bharata, and around him he proudly surveyed his progeny.  Suhotra and Sunahotra, his brave sons- now near middle-age.  They stood as proud as the father, beaming at him through the admiring eyes of loving sons.  Suhotra’s sons- Brhat and Jahnu, both of King’s age themselves and looking it too.  Through their father they had taken Bharata’s own wavy, black hair and dark, brown eyes.  And then his favourite grandson, Sunahotra’s son Kasha- gentle, kind and loving.  Behind them, Brhat’s wife cradled the infant Ajamidha- Brhat’s one year old son.  

This was Bharata’s grand dynasty, and he was proud of it like any patriarch would be.  Was this how the Vaivasvat Manu felt, when he gazed upon his descendants?  Was this what Ikshvaku missed out on, when he fought with his brothers and died before his sons’ eyes?  Surely men like Pururava, Ayu, Nahusha and Yayati must have experienced this profound sentiment, before the Somavansha broke up into countless fragments?  Bharata felt overwhelmingly content that as he stepped down, he had forged a powerful Kingdom for his sons, large and stable enough for them to live peacefully.  This would be the land of the Bharatas from now on, a Bharatvarsha.

	He turned to Rshi Vasishtha, feeling as filial to him as he did to his descendants.  Like his son Sunahotra had taught him so many years ago, he bent and reverentially touched the Rshi’s feet.  Rshi Vasishtha was ninety-two and had given his life to Maharaja Bharata, powering his actions through the authority of the Veda.  His Vasishtha title gave him the authority to compose hymns, devise interpretations and conduct rituals that carried authenticity even among the Suryavanshi.  And it was important not only from Bharata’s point of view, but from the Veda’s itself.  All across Aryavarta people were rejecting its codes, from Yadavas to Anavas.  The Haihaya Yadavas were even corrupting it, mocking it through their twisted, shameful rituals designed only to taunt the rshis of the Veda.  Beyond the Sindhu, the Dasas were as different to the Veda as imaginable, even though their prayers were of a Prakrit that had remained remarkably similar to Sanskrit.

	It was a grand spectacle- the mighty Bharata dynasty upon a platform, visible for all attendant citizens of Prayaga to witness.  Vasishtha’s pupils conducted a ritual by the platform’s either side, symbolizing the two wheels of the chariot- a machine that had become Bharata’s primary instrument of war. 

	“Rshi Vasishtha,” Bharata began, his voice heavy with emotion, “It is fitting that you were there at my coronation, and are here now as I step down.  The spiritual must always outlast the dynastic.”

	“They run parallel, Maharaja,” Vasishtha replied softly.  “After you, I too must step down and accept my eventual end.  Your sons survive you, as my pupils survive me.  The Bharata name will shine as strong as the Vasishtha.”

	“With your blessings and the continued tutelage of the Vasishtha School, may it be so,” Bharata prayed.  Then the Maharaja turned to his family, the most important moment upon him.  This time his mind went to Kings like Yayati and Puru, men who had to divide their lands among their sons.  Had their decisions been easy, or had they been plagued with doubt?  Was Ikshvaku’s heart made of stone when he imposed primogeniture, and forever cast his brothers and younger son into non-Kingship, or did he feel the heavy burden of a father who was also a King?  Rshi Vasishtha’s voice rung in his head.  “Primogeniture- whether you like it or not.  Give it all to your first-born and make it Law.  Only then will your Kingdom survive your death.”

	But Bharata was neither Ikshvaku nor Yayati.  “Sunahotra, my son,” he said to the younger, “I know you as well as I know myself.  You and I have always shared a special bond, and I know what your heart desires.  When you returned to me from the Ashvamedha, I saw the look in your eyes.  You seek peace, my son, not war and Kingdom.  Yet you have also given your heart to building this Kingdom, your blood and your sweat.  So I grant you the authority to start your own line, to forge your Kingdom in the fashion you desire.  Let Kashi stay with you, I have created it for your son- and in your family it must remain.”

	If Suhotra found that unfair, he did not show it.  Bharata turned to him now, assessing his elder son.  He knew that there was no love lost between his sons.  Suhotra was twelve when they fled from Pratisthana, chased by violent Purus and Somavanshi howling for their blood.  He had seen the cruelty of men and was scarred by it.  His was the suspicious mind that saw enemies everywhere- even in his brother.  

“And you, my elder son,” the Maharaja said.  “You are a man born to be a King, I knew it the day I heard of your valour in Pratisthana.  A King should be relieved to have a son like you as his heir.  Prayaga, Kampilya, Ahikshetra, Bharatpura, Haradvara, Plaksha, Trigarta and all the towns and villages between them- I give these to you.  You are the King of the Grand Bharata Kingdom from today, and your sons will rule it after you.”

***

**Forty Years Later**

Kashi.  If Prayaga was the political capital of the Grand Bharata Kingdom, then Kashi was its spiritual heart.  Situated at the southern banks of the Ganga, the city looked across to dense forest on the other side- full of deer, bear, elephant, tiger and panther.  This was a golden city, King Kasha had spent most of his inheritance importing gold and metal and decorating Kashi with countless figures, statues and golden awnings.  Opulence and wealth resided in Kashi, its denizens serviced by a dutiful and responsible ruler who, in turn, was guided by a young, promising Vasishtha rshi.  And there was the promise of an even golden future, for King Kasha had been blessed with three, strong and healthy sons- Gritsamada, Dirghatapasa and Shala.  But the citizens did not know of the trouble that brewed inside the King’s quarters.

	“There is precedence for it, father,” argued Gritsamada, at seventeen the eldest son.  “Rajarshi Yati took the spiritual path, as did Maharshis Kanva and Medhatithi generations after him.  Besides, is that not more loyal to the spirit of Kashi?”

	Kasha paused, the boy’s argument had merit.  If he truly wanted Kashi to be the spiritual beacon of Bharatvarsha, then was it not right that the city’s ruling family renounce arms and take up the spiritual path?  But Gritsamada was his eldest son, and he had such high hopes for him.  

	“Even great-grandfather agrees,” continued Gritsamada, pressing his point.  “He has offered to take me into his ashrama.”

	To that Kasha could offer no argument.  The Grand Patriarch Bharata was still a healthy, sagely man at the advanced age of a hundred-and-four.  He had taken residence in Kashi after his retirement, finding comfort among the rshis and ascetics that congregated to the city.  Now he ran a flourishing school of his own, devoted to the Veda.  As a Maharaja he was compared to Ikshvaku the Great.  Bharata the Acharya was being compared to Vaivasvat Manu and Maharshi Vasishtha.  And if he had expressed willingness to take Gritsamada as his pupil, then Kasha could not refute that desire.  His shoulders slumped helplessly, and the King of Kashi realized that he had no choice but to let go of his firstborn.  

	“Very well,” he said finally.  “You may take the path of a rshi, if that is what your heart desires.  At least I still have two sons left to me.”  The King did not know yet that his sons planned to follow in their elder brother’s footsteps.

***

**Forty Years Later**

The Bharata Rajarshis sat together in council- all men of great wisdom and learning.  Gritsamada was eldest among them, and also their guru.  Then there was Shala, his younger brother.  Their sons Shunaka and Arishtanemi were also present- strong builds and sharp bones like their fathers.  Youngest among them was Dhanvantari, the twenty year old son of King Dirghatapasa.  These were descendants of the late King Kasha, scions of royal birth given to pursuits more spiritual.

	“You should have visited your father first,” said Gritsamada to Dhanvantari.  The young crown prince-turned-rshi had returned to Kashi after five long years.  His travels saw him to Plaksha, Puskara, Ujjayani and Dvaravati.  

	Dhanvantari kept his head low.  “You are my guru.  I owe my father for the physical life he has given me.  But I owe you for the spiritual, and that debt is higher.”	

	Gritsamada smiled at his young nephew.  Dhanvantari had a unique way with his words, and his grim and low tone imbibed everything he said with a mystic aura.  “There are no debts between us, especially because there can be none between uncle and nephew.  When this council is over, you should make your way to the royal quarters,” Gritsamada said.

	Dhanvantari obediently nodded his head.  Gritsamada turned to Shala, who said, “There is a sufficient amount of knowledge now to divide the Mandalas into eight, specific groups.”

	There was no need for Shala to offer any preamble.  These were men whose sole profession was the study and exploration of Veda.  “There are still certain ambiguities when it comes to the chronology,” said Gritsamada, “But those exist only where the composer is unidentifiable.  Arishtanemi disagrees though.”

	Unlike the rest of them, Arishtanemi had soft, greyish eyes.  His long and curly hair was tied into thick locks that hung loosely around his head.  He was the only Bharata rajarshi who had declared abstinence from his dynastic duties of producing an heir.  Arishtanemi’s ascetic, isolated ways were in sharp contrast to the royal, ritual and exploratory endeavours of the others.

	“Our entire sequencing and grouping of the Mandalas depends on the assumption that when a hymn is attributed to a rshi, it can be pinpointed to a particular person,” said Arishtanemi.  His was a gruff tone and he spoke slowly, choosing his words carefully.  “But when the author of a hymn is say, Vasishtha, how do we know whether it is the Maharshi- or any of the thousands of Vasishtha rshis that have taken his name since?  In theory, the hymn would as likely be sixty years old as six hundred.”

	“I disagree,” said Shunaka.  “A deeper study can always reveal the exact authorship of the hymn.  The Nasadiya hymns were certainly of Maharshi Vasishtha’s times, for we see their influence in later hymns developed by the Vasishtha School.  We may know by dynastic records that the Nadistuti hymns were composed by the Vasishtha rshi of Maharaja Bharata.  But we can also come to this understanding by looking at another fact.  Vasishtha ashramas were well established all over Aryavarta only by Maharaja Bharata’s time, not before then.  Thus, no Vasishtha rshi could visualize and represent the geography of Aryavarta with such clarity as in the Nadistuti hymns, not before Maharaja Bharata’s time.”

	“This does not actually affect the ordering brother Gritsamada has proposed,” said Shala, his tone indicating that this was a debate he wanted to get past.  “Whether a hymn has been composed by the original Maharshi or by one of his name, it can still be grouped together with others like it.  Moreover, a large part of the grouping depends on the Deva or Cosmic Principle the hymn is dedicated to.  This overlaps with the composer-based grouping in a way that negates any ambiguity in true composer-ship.”

	Arishtanemi’s eyes twinkled with resistance but he said nothing, showing respect to his father and uncle.  In any case, his pursuit of the Veda was single-mindedly towards Rajarshi Yati’s esoteric compositions that formed the end of most Mandalas.  He had not inherited his family’s inclination towards collation, organization and ritualistic perfection.  

	“This ordering gives the Veda a unique structure that keeps the assortment of hymns and prayers cohesive,” said Gritsamada.  “Brother Shala feels that our ordering deserves a new name, something to differentiate it from the unorganized Veda that has preceded it.  He has even suggested one.”

	The grandsons of Kasha turned to Shala, who said, “The Veda is a vast, exhaustive work of knowledge.  It contains everything that the people of Aryavarta have ever known and learnt, compressed into prayers to the principle deities of nature.  These prayers are what compose the Veda, they represent the basic units of our cultural and historical memes.  The ancient Maharshis called them riks- songs of praise.  Our ordering offers the most comprehensive and organized structure of the riks ever.  It improves the Veda to present a seamless string of memes and syllables.  This is knowledge refined, it is more than a Veda; it is a Rik Veda.”    

***

The sound of heralds and criers could be heard for yojanas around Kashi, spreading the city’s grand cheer far and wide.  Four months ago the messengers had set out, riding for the farthest cities of even Kapisa and Gandhara in the west and Tamralipti and Kalanga in the east.  The message was to be carried over land, water, hill and through forest- such was its importance.  When had Aryavarta witnessed such a momentous day before?  Kashi was host to the coronation of four new Kings of Bharatvarsha, and its citizens were wild with ecstasy, graciously welcoming common folk from all over Aryavarta.  

	The Great Family stood on the platform, presenting themselves to their subjects in the fashion of the Late Patriarch Bharata.  Cheers could be heard for each and every one of them.  Those who had made their way to Kashi from Plaksha, Haradvara and Kampilya roared the name of Riksha- the younger son of Ajamidha.  The noise of their southern neighbours from Kanyakubja was reserved for Krimilashva, who was coming to the throne at the age of fifty-seven.  The visitors from Prayaga were heard cheering themselves hoarse for Ajamidha’s elder son- the gentle Nila.  But the denizens of Kashi cheered the loudest, and made it clear that this was the city of King Dirghatapasa.  The King was seventy-seven now and his son Dhanvantari had rejected the throne.  Dhanvantari’s eighteen year old son Ketumanta was to be crowned the King of Kashi.  Amid this roaring din, those from towns like Kapisa, Gandhara, Girivraja, Sravasti and Mithila either looked on confused or smiled and joined in the cheer.

	But then young rshis stepped onto the platform and gestured for the crowd to be silent.  Behind them stepped forward the Great Family in all its splendor.  The men were tall and regal in their bearing, their bones hard and strong.  The women were shining graceful, looking the perfect royal counterparts to the men of the Bharata dynasty.  Ajamidha was the family patriarch, and at eighty-four he was still the tallest of all men on the platform.  His brothers Dvimidha and Purumidha were beside him.  These were Kings who were childless, and were giving their thrones to Ajamidha’s sons- all in the interest of maintaining the Grand Kingdom.  The four Kings to be crowned stood on one side- Nila, Riksha, Krimilashva and Ketumanta.  Their bodies gleamed with golden armour sculpted to fit their chiseled, muscular frames.  And to the far end of the Great Family stood the Rajarshis of Kashi- proud creators and guardians of the Rik Veda. 

“Who is that one?”  Kumara asked, pointing to the Bharata rshi on the extreme left.  He had to shout at the top of his lungs to get his voice across to Bhumana next to him.  Kumara was Bhumana’s trader cousin from Plaksha.  The brothers were among the hundreds of people who looked on at the royal family in awe.

	“That’s Rshi Gritsamada, eldest son of the late King Kasha,” shouted Bhumana.

	“And next to him?”

	“Rshi Shala, his youngest brother!”

	“So they would be cousins to Kings Ajamidha, Dvimidha and Purumidha, right?”

	“Yes!”  Shouted Bhumana again, irritated.  “And shut up now!  I want to listen to what he’s saying.”

	Rshi Gritsamada had begun speaking, his loud and booming voice carrying for many rows down the platform.  Those behind these rows waited with barely concealed impatience, eager for the friends in front of them to relay the sentences as soon as they heard them.  

	“I would begin today by welcoming the citizens of Bharatvarsha, our Grand Kingdom.  But that would be a mistake,” began Rshi Gritsamada.  He spoke eloquently, his chest thrust forward and his gaze hovering over all.  He was Rajarshi, but one could easily envision him as a formidable, towering Bharata King.  He shouted to the gathering:  “Today, I address the citizens of all of Aryavarta!”  

	A loud cheer erupted at that, this time the foreigners roaring as loud and enthusiastic as the rest.  The magic of Rshi Gritsamada had already begun.  Kumara took the opportunity to know more of the Bharatas’ rshi line.  “Who are the younger ones standing next to Rshis Gritsamada and Shala?”

	“The Rshis Shunaka, Dhanvantari and Arishtanemi,” Bhumana replied.  “A son for each of the sons of old King Kasha.  That fourth and youngest Rshi is Shaunaka, Rshi Shunaka’s son.”

	Rshis lining the platform urged the crowd to silence again and Rshi Gritsamada continued.  “Citizens of Aryavarta, you are here today because you know that there is something that unites us.  We inhabit a land that has been one since the First Manvantara, and has seen a common, uninterrupted history of millennia.  Whether we fought each other or outsiders, we knew that our culture was the same; that within the Hemakuta and the Himalaya in the north and the Vindhyachala in the south was our land!”  Gritsamada said that last part with force and emotion, his voice rising along with his fist.  The crowd went into a wild cheer again, peppered by shouts to the four new Kings.   

	On either side of the platform, the Vedis had been lit up in the old chariot formation of the Bharata dynasty.  Their fires added to the din, sending ash and soot down the gathering.  People coughed and rubbed their eyes, but no one made to leave.  The citizens of Kashi and Prayaga were used to this, and the others were trying to put on a brave show.  Several new prayers were recited- compositions by Kashi’s Rajarshis that had already been grouped into a Mandala of their own.  These went along with other ceremonial prayers taken from Vasishtha, Angirasa, Atri and Kashyapa Schools.  

	The crowd began smaller prayers of its own- songs of praise in local Prakrits.  Their prayers were to deities like Vishnu, Rudra and Brahma.  After more than an hour of the ritualistic frenzy, King-Patriarch Ajamidha stepped forward.  When he did, the crowd immediately fell silent.  King Ajamidha’s name was known to the people of even Gandhara and Tamralipti.

	“I was but an infant of one year, when the Late King Bharata passed the rule to his sons,” Ajamidha said in a coarse but loud voice.  “I have no memory of that momentous occasion, but I can imagine today how my great ancestor must have felt.  There is no description for the emotion that come with realizing that you have done your duty to your Kingdom, that you hand it over to capable men.  But unlike the Late King, I am no orator- and I can make no long, inspiring speeches.  Let me hand the proceedings to my cousin, Rajarshi Gritsamada.  It is getting warm, and I do not like keeping our citizens and visitors waiting in the hot sun.”

	So the senior Rshis Gritsamada and Shala took over again, guiding the Vedis as they announced the arrival of the auspicious moments.  Nila was crowned first- King of the territory from Prayaga to Kampilya.  Then it was his younger brother Riksha’s turn.  Riksha would rule Vinasana, Plaksha and Ahikshetra.  Krimilashva followed by taking command of Kanyakubja from his father Sunaha.  And finally it was Kashi’s turn, and the cheer rose to its loudest.  The retiring King Dirghatapasa crowned Ketumanta, and so the people of Bharatvarsha got their four Kings.  When it was done, an impromptu competition arose among the crowd, people trying to see which King got the loudest cheer.  Slowly and steadily the name of Nila rose louder, and he was the eldest of his generation after all.  Then, as the Bharata family made to descend the platform, another cheer found voice among the crowd.  It was not discernable at first, and Ajamidha strained his ears while looking towards his brothers with an eyebrow raised.  Then he caught his cousin Gritsamada smiling, and in an instant he heard it too.  The people had begun chanting in unison, repeatedly, one simple thing.

“Bharatvarsha is Aryavarta; Aryavarta is Bharatvarsha!”
